docs(blob): blog on ibis + substrait + duckdb (#5382)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/blog/ibis_substrait_to_duckdb.md

**by Gil Forsyth**

Ibis strives to provide a consistent interface for interacting with a multitude
of different analytical execution engines, most of which (but not all!) speak
some dialect of SQL.

Today, Ibis accomplishes this with a lot of help from `sqlalchemy` and `sqlglot`
to handle differences in dialect, or we interact directly with avalable Python
bindings (for instance with the `pandas`, `datafusion`, and `polars` backends).

Ibis goes to <span class="underline">great</span> lengths to generate sane and consistent SQL for those
backends that use it. We are also interested in exploring other means of
communicating consistently with those backends.

[Substrait](https://substrait.io/) is a new cross-language serialization format for communicating (among
other things) query plans.  It's still in its early days, but there is already
nascent support for Substrait in [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/dev/cpp/streaming_execution.html#substrait), [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/docs/extensions/substrait), and [Velox](https://engineering.fb.com/2022/08/31/open-source/velox/).

Ibis supports producing Substrait plans from Ibis expressions, with the help of

> our helper library [Ibis Substrait](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis_substrait).  Let's take a quick peek at how we might use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [ibis-substrait](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis_substrait) library.  Let's take a quick peek at how we might use
```

it for query execution.

## Getting started

First, we can create a `conda` environment using the latest versions of

> `duckdb`, `ibis`, and `ibis_substrait` (all of this is quite new so you'll
> almost certainly need to upgrade if you want to play along at home)

Reviewer: This caveat doesn't feel necessary

```suggestion
`duckdb`, `ibis`, and `ibis_substrait`.
```

    mamba create -n ibis_substrait_duckdb ibis-framework==4.1 ibis-substrait==2.19 ipython python-duckdb

All of the data in these examples is from the IMDB, available on their [dataset portal](https://datasets.imdbws.com/).

I made use of [Ready, Set, Data!](https://github.com/saulpw/readysetdata) to grab it in `parquet` format and then insert
it into a DuckDB database.

    import duckdb
    con = duckdb.connect("/home/gil/imdb.ddb")
    con.execute(
        "CREATE TABLE ratings AS SELECT * FROM '/home/gil/data/imdb/imdb_ratings.parquet'"
    )
    con.execute(
        "CREATE TABLE basics AS SELECT * FROM '/home/gil/data/imdb/imdb_basics.parquet'"
    )

## Query Creation

For our example, we'll build up a query using Ibis but without connecting to our
execution engine (DuckDB).  Once we have an Ibis expression, we'll create a
Substrait plan, then execute that plan directly on DuckDB to get results.

To do this, all we need is some knowledge of the schema of the tables we want to
interact with.  We might get these schema from a metadata store, or possibly a

> coworker, or a friendly mouse.

Reviewer: :mouse:

However we arrive at it, if we know the column names and the datatypes, we can
build up a query in Ibis, so let's do that.

>     import ibis

Reviewer: Suggesting to move the `_` import up here to declutter later on

```suggestion
    import ibis
    from ibis import _
```

    │ tt0000003 │ short     │ Pauvre Pierrot         │ Pauvre Pierrot         │ 0       │ 1892      │ … │
    │ tt0000004 │ short     │ Un bon bock            │ Un bon bock            │ 0       │ 1892      │ … │
    │ tt0000005 │ short     │ Blacksmith Scene       │ Blacksmith Scene       │ 0       │ 1893      │ … │
    └───────────┴───────────┴────────────────────────┴────────────────────────┴─────────┴───────────┴───┘

In the interest of keeping things family-friendly, we can filter out any adult
films. We can filter out any IMDB titles that aren't movies, then select out the
columns `tconst` and `primaryTitle`.  And we'll include `startYear` just in case
it's interesting.

    basics = basics.filter([basics.titleType == "movie", basics.isAdult == "0"]).select(
        "tconst",
        "primaryTitle",
        "startYear",
    )

With the data (lightly) cleaned up, we can construct our query for top films.
We want to join the two tables `ratings` and `basics`. Then we'll order them by
`avg_rating` and `num_votes`, and include an additional filter that the movie
has to have at least 200,000 votes.

>     from ibis import _
>     
>     

Reviewer: Suggesting to move the `_` import up to be with the rest of the `ibis` imports

```suggestion
```

    topfilms = (
        ratings.join(basics, "tconst")
        .order_by([_.avg_rating.desc(), _.num_votes.desc()])
        .filter(_.num_votes > 200_000)
        .limit(10)
    )

>     topfilms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

No repr here :).

**by Gil Forsyth**

Ibis strives to provide a consistent interface for interacting with a multitude
of different analytical execution engines, most of which (but not all!) speak
some dialect of SQL.

Today, Ibis accomplishes this with a lot of help from `sqlalchemy` and `sqlglot`
to handle differences in dialect, or we interact directly with avalable Python
bindings (for instance with the `pandas`, `datafusion`, and `polars` backends).

Ibis goes to <span class="underline">great</span> lengths to generate sane and consistent SQL for those
backends that use it. We are also interested in exploring other means of
communicating consistently with those backends.

[Substrait](https://substrait.io/) is a new cross-language serialization format for communicating (among
other things) query plans. It's still in its early days, but there is already
nascent support for Substrait in [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/dev/cpp/streaming_execution.html#substrait), [DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/docs/extensions/substrait), and [Velox](https://engineering.fb.com/2022/08/31/open-source/velox/).

Ibis supports producing Substrait plans from Ibis expressions, with the help of

> the [ibis-substrait](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis_substrait) library.

Author: oops.  nice catch!

> the [ibis-substrait](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis_substrait) library.

Author: fixed!
